[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. In the last few
videos, we've been talking about positive poly
numbers, or we might just say poly numbers
for short. These are fundamental building
blocks for algebra, and the way I want you to
think about them is that they are extensions
of ordinary numbers or more sophisticated
versions of numbers. If you look at the way
we add two positive poly numbers or the way we
multiply them, if you just look at the top level,
the zero-degree terms, then you just have ordinary
addition of numbers or ordinary multiplication of
numbers. So at the top level, at degree zero, we
are just getting ordinary arithmetic, and what
happens below is some kind of sophisticated or
more fancy arithmetic that's built up from it.
Today let's start off by talking about another
operation: the idea of multiplying a polynomial to
give us another poly number. For example, here is
a poly number: (2, 3) multiplied by the ordinary
number 5 gives us the poly number (10, 15).
The rule is simply that you take a poly number,
multiply it by m, a number, and you get the
new poly number whose entries are multiplied
by m. So we're scaling the poly number, and
this operation has some obvious properties:
if you have two poly numbers P and Q and you
take m times (P + Q), you get mP + mQ. If you
have two numbers m and n and you multiply
a poly number P first by n and then by m,
it's the same as multiplying P by the
product mn. And if we have m times (P
times Q) where P and Q are both poly numbers,
that's the same as (mP) times Q, which is also
the same as P times (mQ) (I didn't have room
to write it). So this is a useful additional
operation that involves not just poly numbers
but also numbers as well. We should be careful
to distinguish between poly numbers and ordinary
numbers; technically, they're different objects.
This idea of scaling poly numbers gives us an
alternative way of thinking about multiplying
two poly numbers, which makes it very parallel
to Hindu-Arabic multiplication. For example,
if you're multiplying (2, 3) by (1, 0, 4), the
result, which is over here (2, 3, 0, 12), can also
be obtained by taking this one and multiplying it
first by (2, 0, 0), giving us (2, 0, 8), and then
multiplying it by (0, 3), which has the effect
of multiplying each of the entries by 3 and also
shifting everything down one. So we've got 2 times
(1, 0, 4) plus 3 times the shifted-down (1, 0, 4).
Why is that the same as Hindu-Arabic
multiplication? Well, suppose we wanted
to multiply the numbers 401, which is one read up,
times this number 32. In ordinary multiplication,
we would use this 2 and multiply by 401 to give us
802, and then we would multiply by 3 (which is 0,
12) and shift everything over one because
we're actually multiplying by something
in the tens spot. Then we add the ones,
tens, hundreds, and thousands. Normally,
there being 12 here is not allowed; we would
ordinarily carry something over to the next spot,
but in this setup, what we're going to
do is just allow the entries of each
position to be arbitrary natural numbers, not
restricted from 0 to 9. So that's essentially
what we're doing when we're doing this
kind of multiplication. We're just doing
Hindu-Arabic multiplication allowing
arbitrary numbers in each of the slots.
Here's another example: you can check
that, say, (3, 2, 5) times (1, 4,
0) is obtained by first multiplying this by
3, multiplying it by 2 and shifting down,
multiplying this by 5 and shifting down two, and
then adding all the way across like that. Here's
a very easy example with a special poly number
(0, 1), just noting that its effect on another
poly number is simply to shift it down one.
This poly number is the simplest poly number
which is not itself essentially a number, and it's
going to play an important role as we carry on.
Now let's talk about associativity of
multiplication. Suppose we have three
poly numbers P, Q, and R with entries p_i,
q_i, and r_i. The product PQ is another poly
number whose i-th entry is given by this formula:
the sum over all k's and l's, positive numbers,
of p_k times q_l where k + l sum to i. Alright,
so now suppose we have these three poly numbers,
we multiply them all together in the order PQ and
then R. Well, the i-th entry of that is, according
to this rule, the sum over all k and l where k + l
equals i of the k-th entry of P times Q times the
l-th entry of R. Now, what's inside here itself
is going to be replaced by this thing right here:
the sum over all, say, n and m summing to k of
p_n times q_m. So this is a double summation,
a little bit complicated. But when you stare
at it, you really have these three numbers n,
m, and l, and they have the property
that they add up to i. We're really
multiplying p_n times q_m times r_l over all such
possibilities. When we've written it this way,
we see that it's now symmetric; it'll be the same
as what we get when we expand this thing out:
P times (QR)'s i component. That's essentially a
sketch of the proof of why associativity works.
To give you a sense of what this formula means,
let's have a look at a few examples. Here we're
multiplying three poly numbers: (1, 2) times (2,
5) times (4, 3). That formula that we had at the
end of the last slide tells us the way we do this
as follows: to find the 0th entry of the result,
we take the product of all the entries whose
indices sum up to 0, and there's only one way
of doing that: it's the 0 plus 0 plus 0 makes
0. So there's 1 times 2 times 4; we get 8. To
get the first entry, we have to look at products
of three things: one from here, one from here,
one from here so that the sum of the indices is
one. That could be 0, 0, 1, or it could be 0, 1,
0, or it could be 1, 0, 0. There are the three
products that we have to add up correspondingly,
giving us 42. The second-degree term is obtained
by taking products of three things so that the sum
of the indices is now 2. That can be obtained
by taking 1 times 5 times 3 (that's degree 0,
that's degree 1, that's degree 1, so that has a
total degree of 2 when we multiply), or we could
take 2 times 2 times 3, or we could take 4 times
2 times 5. We add those three possibilities up;
we get 67. Finally, the degree 3 term:
there's only one way of getting a degree
3 term, which is to take the degree 1 term times
the degree 1 term times the degree 1 term. This
product that we've just done corresponds
to the usual kind of polynomial product:
multiply (1 + 2x) times (2 + 5x) times (4 +
3x), and we're getting that polynomial there.
Here's another example that you can check
the details to make sure you understand how
this procedure works. So now that we've
got some familiarity with poly numbers,
it's time for us to say now exactly
what is a polynomial. We'll do that
next time. I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger, and thanks for listening.
[Music]